README.md, before:

# mb-math

[![Tests](https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-math/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-math/actions/workflows/test.yml)

Mathematical functions such as range-clamping, interpolation, extrapolation,
etc.  This is companion code to my [educational video series about code and
sound][0].

You might also be interested in [mb-sound][1], [mb-geometry][2], and [mb-util][3].

This code is reasonably well-tested, but I recommend using it for non-critical
tasks, not for making important decisions or for mission-critical data
modeling.  Most of the function implementations target 4 to 6 decimals of
accuracy, which may be too low for some applications.

## Quick start

Clone the repo, follow the [standalone installation instructions
below](#installation-and-usage), and run
`bin/console`.  Use Pry's `ls` command to get a list of what's available, and
the `show-source -d` command to see a function's documentation).


```bash
bin/console
```

```ruby
ls
show-source -d clamp
```

## Examples

For typing convenience, and to avoid conflicting with Ruby's top-level `Math`
module, everything lives under `MB::M` instead of `MB::Math`.

### Smooth interpolation

The `interp` method blends between two `Numeric`s, `Array`s, `Hash`es, or
`Numo::NArray`s.

#### Numbers

```ruby
MB::M.interp(1, 2, 0.5)
# => 1.5
```

#### Hashes

```ruby
a = { x: 0.5, y: 1.5 }
b = { x: 1.0, y: -1.0 }

MB::M.interp(a, b, 0)
# => { x: 0.5, y: 1.5 }

MB::M.interp(a, b, 1)
# => { x: 1.0, y: -1.0 }

MB::M.interp(a, b, 0.5)
# => { x: 0.75, y: 0.25 }
```

#### Smoothed interpolation

The `:func` keyword argument accepts a tweening function.  Anything that
responds to `:call` and returns 0.0 if given 0.0 and 1.0 if given 1.0 can be
used here.

```ruby
a = [-1, -1]
b = [1, 2]
steps = [0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1]
MB::M.interp(a, b, steps, func: MB::M.method(:smootherstep))
# => [[-1, -1], [-0.79296875, -0.689453125], [0.0, 0.5], [0.79296875, 1.689453125], [1, 2]]
```

#### Linear extrapolation

Note: extrapolation doesn't work as one might expect with `smoothstep` or
`smootherstep`.

```ruby
a = 1
b = 2
MB::M.interp(a, b, 2)
# => 3
```

### Plotting

A simple wrapper around GNUPlot (or any compatible plotter) is provided that
can plot to an image file, a graphical window, or a text console.

The `MB::M::Plot#plot` method takes a `Hash` mapping dataset names to data
values.

```ruby
# Standard plot
p = MB::M::Plot.terminal(width_fraction: 1, height_fraction: 1, width: 40, height: 15)
p.plot({noise: Numo::SFloat.zeros(10).rand(-0.9, 0.9)}, columns: 1, rows: 1)
```

```
   1 +----------------------------+
     |  +  +   +  +  +  +   +  +  |
 0.5 |-+            noise *******-|
     |         *               *  |
     |  *     * *              ** |
   0 |-* *   *  *             * +*|
     | *  *  *   *            *  *|
-0.5 |*+  * *    *           *  +-|
     |     *      *          *    |
     |  +  +   +  ***********  +  |
  -1 +----------------------------+
     0  1  2   3  4  5  6   7  8  9
```

```ruby
# Scatter plot
p = MB::M::Plot.terminal(width_fraction: 1, height_fraction: 1, width: 40, height: 20)
points = (0..(Math::PI * 2)).step(Math::PI / 8).map { |a| [ 0.9 * Math.cos(a), 0.9 * Math.sin(a) ] }
p.xrange(-1, 1)
p.plot({ circle: points })
```

```
    1 +----------------------------+
      |      +       +      +      |
      |             circle ******* |
      |                            |
  0.5 |-+       *********        +-|
      |        *         **        |
      |       *            *       |
    0 |-+    *              *    +-|
      |       *             *      |
      |       *            *       |
      |        ***       **        |
 -0.5 |-+         *******        +-|
      |                            |
      |                            |
      |      +       +      +      |
   -1 +----------------------------+
     -1    -0.5      0     0.5     1
```

### Scaling ranges

Scales values or `Numo::NArray`s from one linear range to another,
extrapolating for values beyond the end of the range.

```ruby
MB::M.scale(2, 0..4, 10..12)
# => 11

MB::M.scale(-2, 0..4, 10..12)
# => 9

# Reverse ranges work too
MB::M.scale(Numo::SFloat[0, 1, 2, 3, 4], 1..3, 6..2)
# => Numo::SFloat[8, 6, 4, 2, 0]
```

### Finding roots of functions

#### Quadratic roots

```ruby
# f(x) = x^2 + 4
MB::M.quadratic_roots(1, 0, 4)
# => [(0.0+2.0i), (0.0-2.0i)]
```

#### Polynomials

There is a `MB::M::Polynomial` class for representing polynomials of one
variable, and its `roots` method can usually find exact or approximate roots
for most polynomials, even `Complex` roots.

Note that the `MB::M::RootMethods#find_one_root` method that drives this code
is not the fastest, most reliable, or most accurate method possible.  This code
is still mainly useful for experimentation and exploration, rather than serious
numerical computing.

```ruby
p = MB::M::Polynomial.new(1, 0, 0, 0, -1)
puts p.to_s(unicode: true)
# => x⁴ - 1
p.roots
# => [-1, (0-1i), (0+1i), 1]
```

See `experiments/polynomial/*` and `spec/lib/mb/m/polynomial_spec.rb` for more
examples.

#### Other functions

You can find one approximate root at a time for any Ruby function that accepts
and returns a single `Numeric` value using `MB::M::RootMethods#find_one_root`:

```ruby
MB::M.find_one_root(0.25, Math.method(:sin))
# => 0

MB::M.find_one_root(7.1-8.2i, ->(x) { CMath.cos(Math::PI * (x - 3)) * CMath.sin(Math::PI * (1i * x + 2)) })
=> (-3.302389731710742e-41-0.9999999999999998i)
```

There are other examples in `spec/lib/mb/m/root_methods_spec.rb`.

## Installation and usage

This project contains some useful programs of its own, or you can use it as a
Gem (with Git source) in your own projects.

### Standalone usage and development

First, install a Ruby version manager like RVM.  Using the system's Ruby is not
recommended -- that is only for applications that come with the system.  You
should follow the instructions from https://rvm.io, but here are the basics:

```bash
gpg2 --recv-keys 409B6B1796C275462A1703113804BB82D39DC0E3 7D2BAF1CF37B13E2069D6956105BD0E739499BDB
\curl -sSL https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable
```

Next, install Ruby.  RVM binary rubies are still broken on Ubuntu 20.04.x, so
use the `--disable-binary` option if you are running Ubuntu 20.04.x.

```bash
# Also compatible with Ruby 3.3
rvm install --disable-binary 2.7.8
```

You can tell RVM to isolate all your projects and switch Ruby versions
automatically by creating `.ruby-version` and `.ruby-gemset` files (already
present in this project):

```bash
cd mb-math
cat .ruby-gemset
cat .ruby-version
```

Now install dependencies:

```bash
bundle install

# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt-get install gnuplot-qt

# macOS
brew install gnuplot
```

### Using the project as a Gem

To use mb-math in your own Ruby projects, add this Git repo to your
`Gemfile`:

```ruby
# your-project/Gemfile
gem 'mb-math', git: 'https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-math.git
```

## Testing

Run `rspec` to run all tests.  There is also a GitHub actions pipeline that
runs tests automatically.

## Contributing

Pull requests welcome, though development is focused specifically on the needs
of my video series.

## License

This project is released under a 2-clause BSD license.  See the LICENSE file.

## See also

### Dependencies

- [Numo::NArray](https://github.com/ruby-numo/numo-narray)


[0]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLpRqC8LaADXnwve3e8gI239eDNRO3Nhya
[1]: https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-sound
[2]: https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-geometry
[3]: https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-util

Commit message:

Add an RSpec matcher for arrays, deduplicate equivalent methods.

README.md, after:

# mb-math

[![Tests](https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-math/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-math/actions/workflows/test.yml)

Mathematical functions such as range-clamping, interpolation, extrapolation,
etc.  This is companion code to my [educational video series about code and
sound][0].

You might also be interested in [mb-sound][1], [mb-geometry][2], and [mb-util][3].

This code is reasonably well-tested, but I recommend using it for non-critical
tasks, not for making important decisions or for mission-critical data
modeling.  Most of the function implementations target 4 to 6 decimals of
accuracy, which may be too low for some applications.

## Quick start

Clone the repo, follow the [standalone installation instructions
below](#installation-and-usage), and run
`bin/console`.  Use Pry's `ls` command to get a list of what's available, and
the `show-source -d` command to see a function's documentation).


```bash
bin/console
```

```ruby
ls
show-source -d clamp
```

## Examples

For typing convenience, and to avoid conflicting with Ruby's top-level `Math`
module, everything lives under `MB::M` instead of `MB::Math`.

### Smooth interpolation

The `interp` method blends between two `Numeric`s, `Array`s, `Hash`es, or
`Numo::NArray`s.

#### Numbers

```ruby
MB::M.interp(1, 2, 0.5)
# => 1.5
```

#### Hashes

```ruby
a = { x: 0.5, y: 1.5 }
b = { x: 1.0, y: -1.0 }

MB::M.interp(a, b, 0)
# => { x: 0.5, y: 1.5 }

MB::M.interp(a, b, 1)
# => { x: 1.0, y: -1.0 }

MB::M.interp(a, b, 0.5)
# => { x: 0.75, y: 0.25 }
```

#### Smoothed interpolation

The `:func` keyword argument accepts a tweening function.  Anything that
responds to `:call` and returns 0.0 if given 0.0 and 1.0 if given 1.0 can be
used here.

```ruby
a = [-1, -1]
b = [1, 2]
steps = [0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1]
MB::M.interp(a, b, steps, func: MB::M.method(:smootherstep))
# => [[-1, -1], [-0.79296875, -0.689453125], [0.0, 0.5], [0.79296875, 1.689453125], [1, 2]]
```

#### Linear extrapolation

Note: extrapolation doesn't work as one might expect with `smoothstep` or
`smootherstep`.

```ruby
a = 1
b = 2
MB::M.interp(a, b, 2)
# => 3
```

### Plotting

A simple wrapper around GNUPlot (or any compatible plotter) is provided that
can plot to an image file, a graphical window, or a text console.

The `MB::M::Plot#plot` method takes a `Hash` mapping dataset names to data
values.

```ruby
# Standard plot
p = MB::M::Plot.terminal(width_fraction: 1, height_fraction: 1, width: 40, height: 15)
p.plot({noise: Numo::SFloat.zeros(10).rand(-0.9, 0.9)}, columns: 1, rows: 1)
```

```
   1 +----------------------------+
     |  +  +   +  +  +  +   +  +  |
 0.5 |-+            noise *******-|
     |         *               *  |
     |  *     * *              ** |
   0 |-* *   *  *             * +*|
     | *  *  *   *            *  *|
-0.5 |*+  * *    *           *  +-|
     |     *      *          *    |
     |  +  +   +  ***********  +  |
  -1 +----------------------------+
     0  1  2   3  4  5  6   7  8  9
```

```ruby
# Scatter plot
p = MB::M::Plot.terminal(width_fraction: 1, height_fraction: 1, width: 40, height: 20)
points = (0..(Math::PI * 2)).step(Math::PI / 8).map { |a| [ 0.9 * Math.cos(a), 0.9 * Math.sin(a) ] }
p.xrange(-1, 1)
p.plot({ circle: points })
```

```
    1 +----------------------------+
      |      +       +      +      |
      |             circle ******* |
      |                            |
  0.5 |-+       *********        +-|
      |        *         **        |
      |       *            *       |
    0 |-+    *              *    +-|
      |       *             *      |
      |       *            *       |
      |        ***       **        |
 -0.5 |-+         *******        +-|
      |                            |
      |                            |
      |      +       +      +      |
   -1 +----------------------------+
     -1    -0.5      0     0.5     1
```

### Scaling ranges

Scales values or `Numo::NArray`s from one linear range to another,
extrapolating for values beyond the end of the range.

```ruby
MB::M.scale(2, 0..4, 10..12)
# => 11

MB::M.scale(-2, 0..4, 10..12)
# => 9

# Reverse ranges work too
MB::M.scale(Numo::SFloat[0, 1, 2, 3, 4], 1..3, 6..2)
# => Numo::SFloat[8, 6, 4, 2, 0]
```

### Finding roots of functions

#### Quadratic roots

```ruby
# f(x) = x^2 + 4
MB::M.quadratic_roots(1, 0, 4)
# => [(0.0+2.0i), (0.0-2.0i)]
```

#### Polynomials

There is a `MB::M::Polynomial` class for representing polynomials of one
variable, and its `roots` method can usually find exact or approximate roots
for most polynomials, even `Complex` roots.

Note that the `MB::M::RootMethods#find_one_root` method that drives this code
is not the fastest, most reliable, or most accurate method possible.  This code
is still mainly useful for experimentation and exploration, rather than serious
numerical computing.

```ruby
p = MB::M::Polynomial.new(1, 0, 0, 0, -1)
puts p.to_s(unicode: true)
# => x⁴ - 1
p.roots
# => [-1, (0-1i), (0+1i), 1]
```

See `experiments/polynomial/*` and `spec/lib/mb/m/polynomial_spec.rb` for more
examples.

#### Other functions

You can find one approximate root at a time for any Ruby function that accepts
and returns a single `Numeric` value using `MB::M::RootMethods#find_one_root`:

```ruby
MB::M.find_one_root(0.25, Math.method(:sin))
# => 0

MB::M.find_one_root(7.1-8.2i, ->(x) { CMath.cos(Math::PI * (x - 3)) * CMath.sin(Math::PI * (1i * x + 2)) })
=> (-3.302389731710742e-41-0.9999999999999998i)
```

There are other examples in `spec/lib/mb/m/root_methods_spec.rb`.

## Installation and usage

This project contains some useful programs of its own, or you can use it as a
Gem (with Git source) in your own projects.

### Standalone usage and development

First, install a Ruby version manager like RVM.  Using the system's Ruby is not
recommended -- that is only for applications that come with the system.  You
should follow the instructions from https://rvm.io, but here are the basics:

```bash
gpg2 --recv-keys 409B6B1796C275462A1703113804BB82D39DC0E3 7D2BAF1CF37B13E2069D6956105BD0E739499BDB
\curl -sSL https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable
```

Next, install Ruby.  RVM binary rubies are still broken on Ubuntu 20.04.x, so
use the `--disable-binary` option if you are running Ubuntu 20.04.x.

```bash
# Also compatible with Ruby 3.3
rvm install --disable-binary 2.7.8
```

You can tell RVM to isolate all your projects and switch Ruby versions
automatically by creating `.ruby-version` and `.ruby-gemset` files (already
present in this project):

```bash
cd mb-math
cat .ruby-gemset
cat .ruby-version
```

Now install dependencies:

```bash
bundle install

# Ubuntu/Debian
sudo apt-get install gnuplot-qt

# macOS
brew install gnuplot
```

### Using the project as a Gem

To use mb-math in your own Ruby projects, add this Git repo to your
`Gemfile`:

```ruby
# your-project/Gemfile
gem 'mb-math', git: 'https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-math.git
```

## Testing

Run `rspec` to run all tests.  There is also a GitHub actions pipeline that
runs tests automatically.

### Testing helpers for your projects

`mb-math` provides some RSpec matchers to help with comparing `Array` and
`Numo::NArray`:

- Approximate element-by-element equality: `all_be_within(max_delta).of_array(other)`

To use these matchers, `requre 'mb/m/rspec_matchers'` to your `spec_helper.rb`
file:

```ruby
# spec/spec_helper.rb in your project

require 'mb/m/rspec_matchers'
```

See `lib/mb/m/rspec_matchers.rb`.

## Contributing

Pull requests welcome, though development is focused specifically on the needs
of my video series.

## License

This project is released under a 2-clause BSD license.  See the LICENSE file.

## See also

### Dependencies

- [Numo::NArray](https://github.com/ruby-numo/numo-narray)


[0]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLpRqC8LaADXnwve3e8gI239eDNRO3Nhya
[1]: https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-sound
[2]: https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-geometry
[3]: https://github.com/mike-bourgeous/mb-util
